# C: Assembly for Humans

And now, moving on to the C programming language (technically the third language you are learning today). In [*Averaging Two Numbers: Now with Functions!*](/6.3_averaging_with_functions.html), we wrote a program that calculated the average of two numbers. The issue with this program is that it is written in assembly. 

Assembly has two disadvantages:

- It is not easily readable
- Programs only work on one architecture. You have to re-write your program if you wanted it to work on another type of computer.

C is a newer (still pretty old) programming language that was designed to solve both of those problems together. C programs still allow you to do all the same things as the lowest-level assembly programs, but they also hide away some of the unimportant details (like all that extra work we had to do to adhear to the calling convention) so you don't have to think about them as a programmer.

## A Quick Introduction to C

There are a few things that you should know about C (and most other higher-level programming languages) before we get started.

Remember how our assembly code always started with a label called `main`? C has a similar concept, called a `main` function. This is the first thing executed when the program starts, and the last function to return when the program ends.

Also, instead of using indentation to specify what is and isn't part of a specific function, C uses curly braces to delimit functions.

So, while an assembly program that starts and does nothing might look like this:

```x86asm
main:
    ret
```

The C equivalent would be:

```c
int main() {
    return 0;
}
```

You should be able to spot how the core functionality of the code is nearly identical, but the [syntax](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syntax) is a little different.

## Compiling and Running a C Program

We are also now getting in to the part of the book where you can actually run the examples on your own computer! 

Let's say you have some c code, and you put it in a file called `main.c`. To compile it, you'd run the following in your terminal (in the directory containing the file):

```sh
gcc main.c -o main
```

The compiled program is now in a file called `main`, which you can execute by running:

```sh
./main
```

Got it? Good. Now, this is where the fun begins...
